EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Learned Scalable Video Coding For Humans and
Machines
Hadi Hadizadeh and Ivan V. Baji´c
Abstract—Video coding has traditionally been developed to
support services such as video streaming, videoconferencing,
digital TV, and so on. The main intent was to enable human
viewing of the encoded content. However, with the advances
in deep neural networks (DNNs), encoded video is increasingly
being used for automatic video analytics performed by machines.
In applications such as automatic traffic monitoring, analytics
such as vehicle detection, tracking and counting, would run
continuously, while human viewing could be required occasionally
to review potential incidents. To support such applications, a new
paradigm for video coding is needed that will facilitate efficient
representation and compression of video for both machine and
human use in a scalable manner. In this manuscript, we introduce
an end-to-end learnable video codec that supports a machine
vision task in its base layer, while its enhancement layer, together
with the base layer, supports input reconstruction for human
viewing. The proposed system is constructed based on the concept
of conditional coding to achieve better compression gains. Com-
prehensive experimental evaluations conducted on four standard
video datasets demonstrate that our framework outperforms both
state-of-the-art learned and conventional video codecs in its base
layer, while maintaining comparable performance on the human
vision task in its enhancement layer. Implementation of the
proposed system is available at https://github.com/hadipardis/svc.
Index Terms—video compression, video analytics, scalable
coding, deep learning, coding for machines
I. INTRODUCTION
V
IDEO analytics is a crucial technology that finds ap-
plication in a wide range of fields, such as visual
surveillance, traffic monitoring, and autonomous navigation.
In many applications, input video is compressed and trans-
mitted to the cloud for subsequent analysis. Depending on
the specific application, there are several approaches that can
be adopted. When machine-based video analytics is the sole
focus, precomputed features can be compressed and transmit-
ted to the cloud instead of the complete video, thus reducing
the required bandwidth [1]. Various hand-crafted and neural-
network-based (learned) approaches have been developed to
serve this purpose [2], [3]. However, if human viewing is also
required, the input video must also be encoded and transmitted,
increasing the complexity of the system.
Another approach involves compressing the input video and
transmitting it to the cloud, where it will be decoded and used
for visual analysis or human viewing. Various video codecs
This work was supported in part by NSERC grants RGPIN-2021-02485
and RGPAS-2021-00038.
H. Hadizadeh and I. V. Baji´c are with the School of Engineering Sci-
ence, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, V5A 1S6, Canada, e-mail:
{hadi hadizadeh,ibajic}@sfu.ca.
have been proposed over the last few decades for this purpose,
including High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) [4] and Ver-
satile Video Coding (VVC) [5]. However, if human viewing is
needed only occasionally, this approach is inefficient, as will
be shown later in the paper.
The swift progress in deep learning technologies has led
to the emergence of several learned image and video codecs
that rely on deep neural networks (DNNs) to compete with
established conventional counterparts like JPEG, HEVC, and
VVC. Notable methods include [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11],
[12], [13], [14]. Nevertheless, a majority of DNN-based codecs
have focused on image and video compression for human
viewing. On the other hand, DNNs are widely used in visual
analytics, but their primary emphasis is not on compres-
sion [15]. An important recent development in this space is
JPEG AI [16], a DNN-based image coding standard whose
aim is to support both human viewing and machine analysis
within a single unified bitstream. An advantage of JPEG AI
over earlier coding standards is that it offers the opportunity to
bypass input image reconstruction and feed entropy-decoded
latent representation into a DNN-based back-end for analysis,
thereby facilitating potential savings in terms of complexity.
However, the JPEG AI standard itself does not offer the means
for the encoder to distinguish machine task-relevant from task-
irrelevant information. Hence, when human viewing is needed
only occasionally, this approach faces similar challenges in
terms of bit-efficiency as earlier coding standards, because
task-irrelevant information is encoded into the bitstream.
Recently, new video standardization efforts – MPEG-VCM
(Video Coding for Machines) [17] and MPEG-FCM (Feature
Coding for Machines) – have been initiated with the aim of
establishing a standardized framework for video coding that
caters to the needs of both human and machine vision. Various
approaches have also been proposed for scalable image coding
for multiple tasks [18], [19], [20], including machine vision
and human viewing. In these methods, the base layer usually
supports the machine vision task (e.g., object detection) while
the enhancement layer supports input reconstruction for human
viewing.
As discussed in [20], a typical machine vision pipeline
involves image encoding, decoding, and the analysis of the
decoded image by a machine vision model. This process can
be represented by a Markov chain [21] X Ñ Y Ñ p
X Ñ V ,
where X denotes the input image, Y represents the latent
representation of X, p
X is the reconstructed image, and V
is the output of the machine vision model. Applying the
data processing inequality [21] to this chain, we can infer
that IpY ; p
Xq ě IpY ; V q, where Ip¨ ; ¨q represents the mutual
arXiv:2307.08978v2  [eess.IV]  17 Nov 2024

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
information [21]. This suggests that machine vision may
require less information (fewer bits, if optimally encoded)
than input reconstruction. This aligns with scalable human-
machine coding approaches mentioned above, where both base
and enhancement layers are utilized for input reconstruction,
but only the base layer (i.e., fewer bits) is used for machine
vision.
In this paper, we present an end-to-end learned scalable
human-machine video codec. The proposed codec is designed
to support object detection in its base layer, and input re-
construction by using both base and enhancement layer. The
proposed system utilizes the back-end of a well-known DNN-
based object detection network (YOLOv5) [22] to execute
the object detection task through its base layer. However,
the architecture of the proposed system is versatile, and it
can be integrated with other machine vision models. Since
object detection is a fundamental machine vision task that
serves as a building block for more complex video analytics –
such as video surveillance, traffic monitoring, object tracking,
smart home, security systems, and so on – it was a suitable
choice that serves two purposes: 1) it provides information
for a variety of downstream analytics applications, and 2) it
allows us to demonstrate the compression benefits of remov-
ing task-irrelevant information from the base layer, thereby
achieving significant gains over conventional approaches when
only machine analysis is required. In terms of compression,
the proposed system is constructed based on the notion of
conditional coding [9], [10], [14], [23], which is theoretically
more efficient than the widely-employed residual coding, as
discussed in Section III.
We motivate our codec design by analyzing the efficiency
of lossy conditional coding compared to lossy residual coding.
In Section III, we present rate-distortion analysis of lossy
conditional coding. To our knowledge, such analysis has not
been presented in the video coding literature thus far. Our
proposed scalable video coding system consists of two layers:
a base layer and an enhancement layer. For the base layer,
we leveraged our previous work presented in [23]. For the
enhancement layer, we incorporated some modules from the
codec introduced in [14] and added a novel feature extraction
and fusion model, as well as a new entropy model, to enable
efficient coding of the enhancement layer conditioned on the
base layer.
After building a compression system on the principles of
conditional coding, we performed extensive experiments to as-
sess its performance. Our experiments on four standard video
datasets demonstrate that the base layer of the proposed system
outperforms state-of-the-art conventional and learned video
codecs in coding for object detection, while the enhancement
layer provides comparable performance for human viewing to
those obtained by the existing codecs. In fact, our proposed
codec serves as a practical demonstration of the effectiveness
of conditional coding. The proposed codec is well suited for
applications where automated machine vision needs to run
continuously while human viewing is needed occasionally,
which we demonstrate through break-even analysis.
This paper is organized as follows. We review some of the
related prior work on learned video coding for humans and
machines, and discuss the differences relative to our present
work in Section II. After that, we provide a rate-distortion
analysis of conditional coding in Section III, which is used
in our codec design. The proposed system is presented in
Section IV. The experimental results are provided in Section
V, and the conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
In recent years, a number of learned video codecs have
emerged in the literature. Lu et al. [24] introduced Deep Video
Compression (DVC), the first end-to-end learned video codec
utilizing temporal predictive coding. Agustsson et al. [13]
proposed an end-to-end video coding model based on a
learning-driven motion compensation framework, where a
warped frame generated by a learned flow map serves as
the predictor for coding the current video frame. Liu et
al. [25] employed feature-domain warping in a coarse-to-fine
approach for video compression, while Hu et al. [26] leveraged
deformable convolutions for feature warping.
Most traditional video codecs rely on residual coding. How-
ever, Ladune et al. [27], [12] argued that conditional coding
relative to a predictor is more efficient than residual coding
when using the same predictor. Building on this concept, Ho
et al. [10] introduced Conditional Augmented Normalizing
Flows for Video Coding (CANF-VC), a high-performance
learned video codec that utilizes conditional coding for
both motion and inter-frame coding. Building on CANF-
VC’s conditional coding engines, we developed a codec
called Learned Conditional Coding Modes for Video Cod-
ing (LCCM-VC) [23], which incorporates additional learned
coding modes to further enhance compression performance.
In [14], a method called DCVC-TCM was proposed, utilizing
a set of temporal multiscale contexts as predictors for condi-
tional coding of video frames.
The methods mentioned above were specifically designed
for video coding for human viewing. However, a few learned
scalable video coding techniques have been developed that
cater to both human vision and machine analytics. For ex-
ample, [28] presents a scalable human-machine video codec
based on the concept of latent-space scalability [29]. This
codec was designed using a hybrid approach that leverages
DNN-based compression for intra coding, and a combination
of DNN and conventional techniques for inter-frame coding.
In [30], a human-centric video compression system for human
and machines was proposed, which can restore faces with
high perceptual quality for human viewing at very low bitrates
while maintaining high recognition accuracy for machine ana-
lytics. A human-machine friendly video compression scheme
(HMFVC) was proposed in [31]. This scheme supports action
recognition in its semantic (base) layer and input reconstruc-
tion for human viewing in its enhancement layer. A deep
scalable video coding for human and machine vision, called
DeepSVC, was proposed in [32], which supports a semantic
layer for object detection, a structure layer for low-bitrate input
reconstruction, and a texture layer for higher quality input
reconstruction.
The proposed system differs from [28] in several ways.
First, [28] is a hybrid codec that incorporates both DNN-based

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
and conventional handcrafted video coding tools, while the
system presented in this paper is an end-to-end learned codec.
Second, [28] used only intra-coding in the base layer, while
our proposed system utilizes inter-frame coding for both the
base and enhancement layers. Third, [28] employed conven-
tional residual inter-frame coding in the enhancement layer,
while our proposed codec is built upon conditional coding.
Finally, [28] used YOLOv3 [33] for object detection in the
base layer while our codec uses the more recent YOLOv5 [22].
The difference with respect to [31] is twofold. First, the
machine task in [31] is action recognition while ours is object
detection. Second, [31] is built upon residual coding whereas
our codec utilizes conditional coding. The proposed system
also differs from [30] in that [30] is designed specifically
for face videos (e.g., videoconferencing), whereas our codec
is applicable across diverse application scenarios. Finally,
although our codec and [32] both consider object detection as
the machine task, there are several key differences. First, [32]
utilizes TROIAlign [34] for object detection, whereas our
codec is based on the popular YOLOv5 pipeline. Second, there
are architectural differences in both the coding engines and the
layer structure. Finally, unlike [32], which applies conditional
coding solely for enhancement, we employ conditional coding
in both base and enhancement layers.
III. RATE-DISTORTION ANALYSIS OF CONDITIONAL
CODING
In this section we provide motivation for our compression
approach by analyzing residual and conditional coding from
the rate-distortion point of view. We will use capital letters
(X) to denote random variables and lowercase letters (x) for
their realizations.
Conditional coding has been argued in [9], [10], [12], [14],
[23] to offer the potential for better compression performance
compared to residual coding. However, these studies offered
only arguments based on lossless compression. Specifically, if
X is the input to be compressed and Y is its predictor, then
it can be shown [23] that
HpX|Y q ď HpX ´ Y q,
(1)
where Hp¨q is the entropy and Hp¨ | ¨q is the conditional
entropy [21]. If we were interested in lossless coding, this
would be enough to motivate the choice of a conditional codec
over a residual one, since entropy is the limit of lossless
compression. However, most practical codecs are lossy, so
we need to employ rate-distortion theory to argue in favor
of conditional versus residual coding. In this section, we offer
such analysis, which can be considered as the extension of (1)
into the realm of rate-distortion.
First, we need to recall a few concepts from rate-distortion
theory [21]. Let dpx, ˆxq be a distortion measure between
an input x and its reconstruction ˆx. The expected distortion
between input X and its reconstruction p
X is computed as
E
”
dpX, p
Xq
ı
“
ÿ
x,ˆx
pXpxq ¨ px
X|Xpˆx|xq ¨ dpx, ˆxq,
(2)
where pXpxq is the input distribution and px
X|Xpˆx|xq is the
conditional distribution of the reconstruction given the input,
Fig. 1. Top: residual coding. Dashed lines are not used in residual coding,
they are shown to aid the analysis in the text. Bottom: conditional coding.
also known as the quantizer. The input distribution is not
under our control, but the quantizer is. For a given distortion
level D ą 0, the set of feasible quantizers for X that achieve
expected distortion of at most D is denoted
PXpDq “
!
px
X|Xpˆx|xq : E
”
dpX, p
Xq
ı
ď D
)
.
(3)
The rate distortion function RpDq is the minimum achievable
rate for encoding input X while incurring expected distortion
of at most D. It is given by:
RpDq “
min
p x
X|Xpˆx|xqPPXpDq IpX; p
Xq,
(4)
where Ip¨; ¨q is the mutual information [21]. Note that in rate-
distortion theory, rate is governed by mutual information rather
than entropy, which is why (1) cannot be used directly to
motivate conditional lossy compression.
Consider the two coding schemes illustrated in Fig. 1,
where the top part shows residual coding and the bottom
part shows conditional coding. In residual coding, prediction
Y is subtracted from the input X to create Z “ X ´ Y ,
which is then encoded and reconstructed as pZ. Finally, input
reconstruction is obtained as p
X “ pZ ` Y . If the distortion is
shift-invariant1 then dpx, ˆxq “ dpx ´ y, ˆx ´ yq “ dpz, ˆzq, so
ErdpX, p
Xqs “ ErdpZ, pZqs. Hence, the rate-distortion function
for residual coding of X is
RrpDq “
min
px
Z|Zpˆz|zqPPZpDq IpZ; pZq,
(5)
where subscript r indicates residual coding and
PZpDq “
!
p pZ|Zpˆz|zq : E
”
dpX, p
Xq
ı
ď D
)
.
(6)
Meanwhile, by applying (4) to the input pX, Y q and consid-
ering the case where the distortion is 0 everywhere on the
support of Y , we arrive at the rate-distortion function for
conditional coding of X relative to Y (Fig. 1 bottom):
RcpDq “
min
p x
X|X,Y pˆx|x,yqPPX|Y pDq IpX; p
X|Y q,
(7)
1Many conventional distortion measures, including norm-based measures,
are shift-invariant.

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 2. The block diagram of the proposed learned scalable video compression system. The input video frame is xt. The base layer has two outputs: the
base frame ˆxb
t and the latent features ˆrt by which the computer vision task is performed. The enhancement layer has only one output, enhancement frame,
which is the reconstructed frame ˆxt.
where subscript c indicates conditional coding, Ip¨; ¨|¨q is the
conditional mutual information [21], and
PX|Y pDq “
!
px
X|X,Y pˆx|x, yq : E
”
dpX, p
Xq
ı
ď D
)
.
(8)
We expand IpX; p
X|Y q as follows:
IpX; p
X|Y q “ HpX|Y q ´ HpX| p
X, Y q
(a)“ HpX ´ Y |Y q ´ HpX ´ Y | p
X, Y q
“ IpX ´ Y ; p
X|Y q
“ Hp p
X|Y q ´ Hp p
X|Y, X ´ Y q
(b)“ Hp p
X ´ Y |Y q ´ Hp p
X ´ Y |Y, X ´ Y q
“ IpX ´ Y ; p
X ´ Y |Y q
(c)“ IpZ; pZ|Y q,
(9)
where (a) (resp. (b)) follows from the fact that given Y , the
only uncertainty in X ´ Y (resp. p
X ´ Y ) is due to X (resp.
p
X), and (c) follows from the fact that Z “ X ´ Y and pZ “
p
X ´ Y . Moreover, due to these relationships, it should be
clear that conditioned on Y , minimization over px
X|X,Y pˆx|x, yq
is equivalent to minimization over p pZ|Z,Y pˆz|z, yq. Combining
this with (9), we have that RcpDq from (7) can also be written
as
RcpDq “
min
px
Z|Z,Y pˆz|z,yqPPZ|Y pDq IpZ; pZ|Y q,
(10)
where
PZ|Y pDq “
!
p pZ|Z,Y pˆz|z, yq : E
”
dpX, p
Xq
ı
ď D
)
.
(11)
Hence, conditional coding of X relative to Y achieves the
same rate distortion as conditional coding of Z relative to Y .
This is shown in Fig. 1(top), where the dashed line indicates
conditional coding, mimicking Fig. 1(bottom).
Next, we turn to the seminal paper on conditional rate-
distortion [35]. In the notation used in [35], we have that our
RrpDq “ RZpDq and our RcpDq “ RZ|Y pDq. Theorem 3.1
in [35] shows that RZ|Y pDq ď RZpDq, with equality if and
only if Y and Z are independent. Hence, we also have that
RcpDq ď RrpDq,
(12)
meaning that for any given distortion level D ą 0, optimal
conditional coding achieves the rate no higher than optimal
residual coding. According to [35], the equality in (12) would
hold if and only if Y and Z “ X ´ Y were independent,
i.e., if Y and X were independent. Hence, so long as the
side information Y provides at least some information about
X, (12) becomes a strict inequality. In practice, however, we
are generally dealing with sub-optimal codecs, so (12) might
not always hold for practical codecs.
Equation (12) is the rate-distortion analog of (1). In fact, (1)
provides the result for the special case D “ 0 (lossless
coding), while (12) extends this to D ą 0. Intuition behind
it is shown in Fig. 1(top), where the dashed lines imply that
the conditional codec for Z can, at the very least, ignore Y ,
and thereby match any performance that residual codec can
achieve.
IV. PROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we present our proposed scalable video
coding system, which is composed of a base layer and an
enhancement layer. We first present an overview of the pro-
posed codec in Section IV-A. We then describe the structure
of the base layer in Section IV-B, followed by the structure
of the enhancement layer in Section IV-C. The overall block
diagram of the proposed system is depicted in Fig. 2.
A. Overview
Let x1:T P RT ˆ3ˆHˆW denote a raw (RGB) video se-
quence of T frames txt, t “ 1, ¨ ¨ ¨ , Tu each of width W
and height H. The aim is to design an end-to-end learnable
system to code the input video in a scalable manner that
caters to both machine vision and human viewing. We design a
system whose base layer facilitates object detection, intended
for machine usage, while the enhancement layer, together with
the base layer, facilitates reconstruction of the input video for
human viewing. Although our scalable system is designed
to support object detection, it can be re-trained to support
any other machine vision task in the base layer. We chose
object detection because it forms the basis for more complex
machine vision scenarios such as video surveillance, tracking,
traffic monitoring, etc. In our design, we exploit the concept
of conditional coding which, as shown in the previous section,
holds a theoretical advantage over the more common residual
coding. In summary, the proposed system operates as follows:
‚ The input video frame is initially coded by the base layer
to generate a reconstructed (decoded) base frame.
‚ The reconstructed base frame is then utilized by a com-
puter vision model to perform the designated machine
vision task (e.g., object detection).

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 3. The block diagram of the base layer of the proposed system. The base layer has two outputs: the reconstructed base frame ˆxb
t and the latent features
ˆrt by which the computer vision task is performed. Our base layer’s architecture is the same as our previous work LCCM-VC [23]. The Mode Generator is
explained in more details in Fig. 4.
‚ Simultaneously, the reconstructed base frame serves as a
predictor in the enhancement layer for conditional coding
of the input video frame, resulting in a reconstructed
frame optimized for human viewing.
Specifically, the base layer encoder codes every video frame,
xt, into a compressed base layer bitstream. The base layer
decoder then decodes the compressed bitstream to obtain a
decoded RGB frame, ˆxb
t, also referred to as the decoded
base frame. This frame is utilized by a computer vision
(CV) model (in our case YOLOv5 [22]) for video analysis
(in our case object detection). Furthermore, ˆxb
t also helps
the enhancement layer perform the reconstruction of the
input frame for human viewing. The base layer is trained
to maximize object detection accuracy while minimizing the
rate of the base layer’s bitstream. Note that the output of
the base layer is an RGB frame. We designed it this way to
ensure seamless integration with any existing computer vision
network in a plug-and-play manner, eliminating the need for
architectural modifications. For instance, this design enables
us to easily replace YOLO [33] with any object detector, such
as SSD [36], without changing their input architecture. These
detectors expect an RGB image in their input, and our base
layer outputs an RGB image.
The input video frame, xt, is also fed into the enhancement
layer alongside the base frame, ˆxb
t. The enhancement layer’s
encoder then compresses the input frame conditionally to
generate a compressed bitstream, which the enhancement
layer’s decoder utilizes to reconstruct an output frame, ˆxt.
The enhancement layer is trained end-to-end to minimize both
the distortion between xt and ˆxt, as well as the rate of the
enhancement layer’s bitstream. In the proposed system, the
base layer is trained first, followed by training the enhance-
ment layer while keeping the base layer frozen. In scalable
human-machine image coding, this strategy has recently been
shown to be advantageous over parallel training of the base
and enhancement layer [37], so we use it for our proposed
video codec as well.
It is important to note that in practice, if the sole objective
is to perform the computer vision task, there is no need to
reconstruct the input frame. That is, the enhancement layer’s
bitstream does not need to be created because ˆxt does not
need to be reconstructed at the decoder. If human viewing
is required, the enhancement layer can be employed and
ˆxt reconstructed. Many video analytics applications, such as
traffic monitoring or video surveillance, require continuous use
of the analytics engine (base layer in our system), and only
occasional human viewing (enhancement layer), for cases like
emergencies or incident review.
B. The Base Layer
As shown in Fig. 3, the base layer consists of several
components, which are described below. The base layer codec
is built upon our previous work LCCM-VC [23]; the main
difference is that the codec in [23] was trained to preserve
the fidelity of the input frame under a rate constraint, while
our base layer codec here is trained to preserve task-relevant
features ˆrt under a rate constraint.
1) Motion Estimation, Extrapolation, and Coding: Initially,
the input video frame, xt, and the previous base frame, ˆxb
t´1,
are fed into a DNN-based motion estimation network. This
network is designed to estimate the optical flow, denoted by
vb
t, between xt and ˆxb
t´1. For this purpose, we use PWC-Net
[38]. The flow vb
t is then encoded by a DNN-based encoder,
Vπ, to obtain a compressed motion bitstream in the base layer.
This stream is decoded by a DNN-based decoder, V ´1
π
, to
obtain a decoded flow, ˆvb
t. For this purpose, we adopt the
conditional coder from CANF-VC [10], which codes a signal
conditioned on its predictor to achieve better rate-distortion

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
performance. To obtain a predictor for conditional coding of
vb
t, we utilized the motion extrapolation network proposed in
[10]. This network leverages the two previously-decoded flow
maps, ˆvb
t´2 and ˆvb
t´1, as well as the three previously-decoded
base frames, ˆxb
t´3, ˆxb
t´2, and ˆxb
t´1, to generate a predictor, ¯vb
t,
for vb
t.
The optical flow map ˆvb
t is used to warp the previously-
decoded base frame ˆxb
t´1 through a motion compensation
network to obtain a predictor frame, ¯xb
t, for conditional coding
of the current frame xt. Also, ˆvb
t is stored in a flow buffer to
be used for motion extrapolation of the subsequent frames. We
used the same motion compensation network as proposed in
[10].
2) Mode Generator: To improve the coding performance
of the base layer, we used the idea of learned conditional
coding modes proposed in our earlier work on learned video
coding, called LCCM-VC [23]. Specifically, the previously-
reconstructed base frame ˆxb
t´1, the motion-compensated frame
¯xb
t, and the decoded flow ˆvb
t are fed to the mode generator
from [23] to obtain two weight maps, ˆαb
t and ˆβb
t . Since these
maps are produced from previously (de)coded data, they can
be regenerated at the decoder without any additional bits.
As shown in Fig. 4, using ˆβb
t , an enhanced predictor, ˜xb
t, is
generated as follows:
˜xb
t “ ˆβb
t d ¯xb
t ` p1 ´ ˆβb
t q d ˆxb
t´1,
(13)
where d denotes Hadamard (element-wise) product and 1 is
the all-ones matrix. At each pixel location, the value of ˜xb
t is
a weighted combination of ¯xb
t and ˆxb
t´1, where the weight
is defined by the corresponding value in ˆβb
t . Hence, ˜xb
t is
a predictor for the current frame being coded, whose values
are adaptively obtained from the previously-reconstructed base
frame (ˆxb
t´1) and the motion-compensated base frame (¯xb
t).
After that, ˜xb
t is multiplied by ˆαb
t in a pixel-wise manner, and
the obtained result, i.e. ˆαb
t d ˜xb
t, is fed as a predictor to the
inter-frame coder described next. Note that, using (13), the
enhanced predictor can be considered as a linear combination
of ¯xb
t and ˆxb
t´1. When ˆβb
t Ñ 0, it becomes equal to ˆxb
t´1, and
when ˆβb
t Ñ 1, it becomes equal to ¯xb
t.
3) Base Inter-frame Coder: The predictor ˆαb
t d ˜xb
t is used
for conditional coding of the current frame xt. For this
purpose, we utilized LCCM-VC [23], which is an extension
of CANF-VC [10]. Using this framework, the conditional
encoder of the base inter-frame coder, Gπ, encodes ˆαb
t d xt
using ˆαtd˜xb
t to produce a compressed bitstream, which is used
to decode an image qxb
t via G´1
π . Finally, the reconstructed base
frame, ˆxb
t, is generated as follows:
ˆxb
t “ qxb
t ` p1 ´ ˆαb
tq d ˜xb
t.
(14)
Note that, for pixels where ˆαb
t Ñ 0, ˆxt becomes equal to ˜xt,
so the inter-frame coder does not need to code anything. This
resembles the SKIP mode in conventional video coders, and
depending on the value of ˆβb
t , the system can copy directly
from ˆxb
t´1, ¯xb
t, or a mixture of these two, to obtain ˜xb
t. When
ˆαb
t Ñ 1, only the inter-frame coder is used to obtain ˆxt. In
the limiting case when ˆαb
t Ñ 1 and ˆβb
t Ñ 1, LCCM-VC [23]
becomes CANF-VC [10]. Hence, as discussed in [23], LCCM-
VC has more flexibility and a larger number of conditional
Fig. 4. The structure of the mode generator.
coding modes than CANF-VC. The architecture of Gπ and
G´1
π
is similar to that of Vπ and V ´1
π
.
4) Task-Relevant Feature Extraction: The obtained base
frame, ˆxb
t, is stored in the base frame buffer for subsequent
frame coding and is also fed to the base task network. In
our work, this is YOLOv5 [22] for object detection, but in
principle any (differentiable) network could be used here for
any computer vision task. To enable unsupervised training of
the base layer, we truncate the task network and utilize a copy
of the resulting front-end of the network within the base layer,
as described next. Specifically, we feed ˆxb
t to the cloned front-
end network in the following manner:
ˆrt “ F front-end
trainable pˆxb
tq,
(15)
where F front-end
trainable p¨q denotes the cloned front-end network, which
is trainable during the training process alongside the rest of
the base layer, and ˆrt is the resultant feature tensor. Then ˆrt
is fed to the back-end part of the original pre-trained task
network, F back-end
original pˆrtq, where F back-end
original p¨q is not trained during
the training process.
The primary advantage of this methodology is to eliminate
the need for ground-truth labels for the base layer. The amount
of labeled data for video (especially uncompressed video,
which is needed in our application) is very limited, and it
makes sense to use it all for testing. So instead, we train the
base layer to match the features rt of the pre-trained network
at a particular layer, where
rt “ F front-end
original pxtq,
(16)
and this way, we don’t need to use labelled video in training.
The selection of the layer for feature matching will de-
pend on the application constraints. The rate-distortion results
in [39], [40] suggest that better performance is achieved
when matching deeper layers. However, this requires making
F front-end
trainable p¨q larger, which in turn increases the complexity of
the base layer. For the experiments in this study, we chose the
first five layers of YOLOv5 as the front-end to demonstrate
the performance of the system. In practice, the optimal choice
will depend on the computational resources, allowed latency,
available bandwidth, etc., in a particular application scenario.
5) Base Layer Loss Function: The loss function for training
the proposed base layer is defined as follows:
Lbaseptq “ Rbaseptq ` λbase MSEprt, ˆrtq
(17)
where MSEprt, ˆrtq is the mean squared error between fea-
tures derived from an uncompressed frame prtq and features

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 5.
A visual example of a portion of the base frame at 0.11 bpp. The
original frame xt (left) and the base frame ˆxb
t (right).
decoded from the base layer pˆrtq, λbase is the Lagrange
multiplier, and Rbaseptq is the total rate of the base layer for
coding xt, which is defined as:
Rbaseptq “ Rmotion
base ptq ` Rsignal
base ptq,
(18)
where Rmotion
base ptq is the rate of the motion bitstream produced
by coding vb
t conditioned on ¯vb
t plus the rate associated for its
hyper prior, and Rsignal
base ptq is the rate for coding xt conditioned
on ¯xb
t plus the rate associated for its hyper prior. As seen
from the above equations, the goal of the base-layer codec is
to preserve task-relevant features while minimizing the bitrate.
This means that the base layer codec is not asked to reconstruct
(or code) task-irrelevant information, which usually results in
a lower bitrate compared to conventional coding approaches
that try to preserve the overall input fidelity.
A visual example of a portion of the base frame (ˆxb
t) in the
trained system is shown in Fig. 5, along with the original
frame (xt). As is evident from this figure, the base frame
omits certain details of the original frame, which are deemed
unnecessary for the object detection task, in order to curtail
the rate. Consequently, the base layer can be encoded at a
significantly lower rate than the original frame.
C. The Enhancement Layer
To implement the enhancement layer of the proposed
system, we used the conditional coding-based framework
proposed in [14] as the basis. However, we made some
modifications to fit it into our scalable codec, as will be
discussed in the following subsections. The components of
the enhancement layer are shown in Fig. 6. In summary, the
enhancement layer works as follows:
‚ The current frame and the previously decoded video
frame from the enhancement layer are used to estimate
a motion flow map, which is subsequently encoded by a
motion coder.
‚ The base frame generated by the base layer is processed
by a base feature extractor, and the resulting base features
are fused with the latent representations of the previously
reconstructed frame in the enhancement layer.
‚ The fused features from the previous step, combined
with the decoded motion flow map, are input into a
temporal context mining module to learn motion-aligned
temporal contexts. These contexts capture a multi-scale
representation of the current frame, each serving as a
predictor for the frame within the latent space.
‚ The current frame is then encoded by a conditional con-
textual codec, which uses the generated temporal contexts
as predictors. This codec employs an entropy model with
parameters estimated from the temporal contexts, along
with the latent representations of the base frame and the
previously decoded frame in the enhancement layer.
‚ The contextual decoder, together with a frame generator,
reconstructs the encoded video frame in the enhancement
layer, which is called “Enhancement Frame.”
We will now provide a detailed description of each component
within the enhancement layer.
1) Motion Estimator and Coder: The current frame xt and
the previously-reconstructed frame in the enhancement layer,
ˆxt´1, are fed to a motion estimation network to estimate a
flow map, ve
t , in the enhancement layer. Similar to the base
layer, we also use PWC-Net [38] for motion estimation in the
enhancement layer. The estimated flow map is then coded by
a hyper-prior-based encoder [6], Pπ, to obtain the compressed
motion bitstream in the enhancement layer. During training,
the hyper-prior-based encoder provides the rate estimate for
the motion information in the enhancement layer, Rmotion
enh ptq.
The motion bitstream is then decoded by the corresponding
hyper-prior-based decoder, P ´1
π , to obtain the decoded flow
map, ˆve
t , which provides an estimated motion vector for each
pixel within the current frame in the enhancement layer.
2) Base Feature Extractor and Fusion: As shown in Fig.
7, the base frame ˆxb
t is first fed to a base feature extractor
network to obtain two output feature tensors: ˆf b
t and ˆyb
t. Note
that the base feature extractor network is different from the
front-end of the task model. The first feature tensor, ˆf b
t , is then
fused with the features of the previous frame reconstructed by
the frame generator, ˆpe
t´1, to generate a new feature tensor ˆue
t.
The feature fusion is performed by a simple network with two
convolutional layers whose structure is shown in Fig. 8. The
second output of the base feature extractor, ˆyb
t, is used by the
entropy model, which is described in Section IV-C7.
3) Temporal Context Mining: The goal of the Temporal
Context Mining (TCM) module is to generate a set of multi-
scale temporal contexts as predictors for conditional coding of
the current frame using the contextual encoder. The structure
of TCM is shown in Fig. 9. To generate the temporal contexts
to encode the current frame, ˆue
t and the decoded flow map ˆve
t
are fed to the TCM module proposed in [14]. TCM uses ˆve
t
and warps ˆue
t at three different scales to obtain three contexts
t¯c0
t, ¯c1
t, ¯c2
tu, each at a different scale. These contexts provide
rich latent temporal information for coding the current frame
in the enhancement layer. After that, these three contexts are
combined through a temporal prior network whose structure
is shown in Fig. 10. The output of this network is ˆce
t, which
conveys the temporal context of the current frame.
In [14], ˆpe
t´1 is used directly as input to the TCM module.
However, in our design, we fuse ˆpe
t´1 with ˆf b
t through the
feature fusion network, and the resulting output, ˆue
t, is used
as input to the TCM module. In this way, the generated
temporal contexts leverage the information provided in both
the base frame and the previous reconstructed frame in the
enhancement layer.

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 6. The block diagram of the enhancement layer of the proposed system. It gets the current frame xt and the base frame ˆxb
t as inputs and generates the
enhancement frame ˆxt as output. Our proposed enhancement layer is built upon DCVC-TCM [14]. The purple blocks are our proposed components.
Fig. 7. The structure of the base feature extractor network.
Fig. 8. The structure of the feature fusion network used in the enhancement
layer.
Fig. 9. The structure of the temporal context mining (TCM) network.
Fig. 10. The structure of the temporal prior network.
4) Contextual Encoder: The structure of the contextual en-
coder is shown in Fig. 11. As shown in this figure, the current
frame xt is encoded by a conditional contextual encoder,
Rπ, to produce a latent representation ye
t . The conditional
contextual encoder uses the three temporal contexts t¯c0
t, ¯c1
t, ¯c2
tu
for conditional coding of xt. These contexts are produced by
the TCM module described in Section IV-C3. The obtained
latent representation ye
t is then quantized and compressed
by an arithmetic encoder whose symbol probabilities are
estimated by a hyper prior-based entropy model [6]. Using this
approach, a compressed contextual bitstream is produced along
with a side compressed bitstream for signaling the hyper-priors
he
t. The contextual encoder uses an entropy model, which is
described in Section IV-C7 below.
5) Contextual Decoder: The structure of the contextual de-
coder is shown in Fig. 11. The contextual bitstream produced
by the contextual encoder is decompressed at the decoder
by an arithmetic decoder to obtain ˆye
t , which is then fed to
a conditional contextual decoder, R´1
π . Similarly, the hyper-
priors of the current frame are decoded from the side bitstream
to obtain the temporal hyper-prior ˆhe
t. A copy of ˆye
t is stored
in the generalized decoded picture buffer (DPB) to be used for
encoding the subsequent frames. R´1
π
uses the three temporal
contexts and transforms ˆye
t into a new latent representation
ˆge
t , which is then fed to the frame generator to reconstruct the
transmitted frame, as will be described next.
6) Frame Generator: The frame generator passes its input
tensor ˆge
t
through a number of convolutional layers and
residual blocks as in [14], and reconstructs the input frame

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 11. The structure of the context encoder Rπ, the context decoder R´1
π , and the frame generator. GDN represents the Generalized Divisive Normalization
layer [41].
as ˆxt. As in [14], the output of the layer before the last layer
in the frame generator, ˆpe
t, is also stored in the DPB along
with ˆxt. The feature tensor ˆpe
t is subsequently used by the
TCM network to produce the temporal contexts.
7) Entropy Model:
Similar to [14] and [9], we use
the factorized entropy model for the hyper-prior coder,
and the Laplace distribution to model the quantized latent
representations in the enhancement layer, ˆye
t . However, to
improve the performance of the entropy model, we fuse the
hyper priors of the current frame, ˆhe
t, with the temporal
prior ˆce
t, decoded latents from the previous enhancement
frame ˆye
t´1 and base features of the current frame ˆyb
t through
an entropy parameter estimation network. In [14], only the
hyper-prior ˆhe
t and the temporal prior ˆce
t are fed to the
entropy model. However, in our design, in addition to ˆhe
t
and ˆce
t, we also feed ˆyb
t and ˆye
t´1 to the entropy model to
enrich its input information. Moreover, we add the attention
layer so the system can learn where to take the relevant
information for entropy modelling. The proposed entropy
model is implemented using an entropy estimation network,
which is described next.
The Entropy Estimation Network: The structure of the
entropy model is shown in Fig. 12. As shown in this figure, the
hyper-prior ˆhe
t and the temporal prior ˆce
t are first concatenated,
and fed to three consecutive convolutional layers. The resulting
feature tensor is then concatenated with ˆye
t´1 and ˆyb
t, and the
generated tensor is fed to two consecutive convolutional layers
followed by an attention layer. The output of the attention
layer is then chunked in half to produce two tensors, ˆµe
t and
ˆσe
t , which are used to estimate the mean and variance of the
Laplace distribution, respectively.
Sample frames from the BasketballDrill sequence (HEVC
Class C) are also shown in Fig. 12: xt is the current (to-be-
coded) frame at time t, ˆxe
t´1 is the previously decoded frame
in the enhancement layer, and ˆxb
t is the base frame at time
t. To gain insight into the operation of the entropy model,
visualizations of the corresponding latent features are also
shown. As seen in these sample visualizations, incorporating
the attention layer into the proposed entropy parameter
estimation network facilitates its ability to selectively focus
on important features within the input data, resulting in more
efficient parameter estimation. For instance, the attention
mechanism weakens static areas that correspond to the floor
in the first channel of ˆσe
t ; since these areas are static, ˆσe
t
reduces towards zero, while it remains higher near moving
objects, the basketball and players. We can also observe that
some parts of the last channel of ˆµe
t are mostly obtained from
the last channel of the base features ˆyb
t (e.g., those in the
solid circle) while some other parts (e.g., those in the dashed
circle) are mostly taken from the enhancement features of the
previous frame, ˆye
t´1. By utilizing attention and feeding it
both the base and previous enhancement features, the entropy
model is able to leverage the information available in the
current base frame as well as previously-reconstructed frames
in the enhancement layer, thereby enhancing its ability to
achieve better compression of the current enhancement frame.
Rate Estimation: As will be discussed in the follow-
ing section, the base and enhancement layers are trained
on sequences of contiguous frames to allow the models to
learn temporal relationships. Specifically, the gradients of the
current frame are back-propagated to the reference frames that
preceded it within a temporal window of length N frames.
As a result, the tensors ˆye
t´1, ˆyb
t and ˆce
t are endowed with
substantial information not only from the current frame, but
also from the preceding frames. This characteristic enables the
system to take advantage of the correlations among the latent
representations of multiple frames to model the entropy more
effectively.
Having obtained ˆµe
t, ˆσe
t , and θe
t “ tˆhe
t, ˆce
t, ˆye
t´1, ˆyb
tu, the
formulation for the conditional distribution of the latent rep-
resentations can be obtained as follows [6]:
pˆye
t |θe
t pˆye
t |θe
t q “
ź
i
pˆye
t |θe
t pˆye
t,i|θe
t q,
(19)

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 12. The structure of the proposed entropy parameter estimation network. The latent feature maps are shown for a sample frame from BaskteballDrill
(HEVC Class C).
where the index i represents the spatial location, and
pˆye
t |θe
t pˆye
t,i|θe
t q “
„
pLpˆµe
t,i, ˆσe
t,iq ˚ U
ˆ
´1
2, 1
2
˙ȷ
pˆye
t,iq
“ cdf
ˆ
ˆye
t,i ` 1
2
˙
´ cdf
ˆ
ˆye
t,i ´ 1
2
˙
,
(20)
where Lpˆµe
t,i, ˆσe
t,iq represents the Laplacian probability density
function with mean ˆµe
t,i and variance ˆσe
t,i, ˚ represents the con-
volution, Up´ 1
2, 1
2q represents the uniform probability density
in the range r´ 1
2, 1
2s (which models uniform quantization),
and cdfp¨q is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
the resulting distribution. The estimated per-sample rate for
coding ˆye
t is given by ´ log2ppˆye
t |θe
t pˆye
t |θe
t qq, and the estimated
entropy is the expectation of this quantity. This rate estimate is
one of the loss terms used for training the enhancement layer,
as discussed next.
8) Enhancement Layer Loss Function: The loss function
for the enhancement layer is defined as:
Lenhptq “ Renhptq ` λenh MSEpxt, ˆxtq,
(21)
where xt and ˆxt are the input and enhancement layer’s
decoded frame in RGB domain, respectively, at time t, λenh
is the Lagrange multiplier, and Renhptq is the rate estimate for
coding the current enhancement-layer frame, which is defined
as follows:
Renhptq “ Rmotion
enh ptq ` Rcontext
enh ptq,
(22)
where Rmotion
enh ptq is the total rate estimate for coding the
motion information in the enhancement layer and Rcontext
enh ptq “
Er´ log2ppˆye
t |θe
t pˆye
t |θe
t qqs.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we describe the experiments performed to
evaluate the performance of the proposed scalable video codec.
Training details are described in Section V-A, followed by the
evaluation methodology in Section V-B, and the experimental
results for the base and enhancement layers in Sections V-C
and V-D, respectively. Break-even analysis is presented in
Section V-E.
A. Training
For training the proposed system, we used the VIMEO-
90K Setuplet dataset [42], which consists of 91,701 7-frame
sequences with fixed resolution 448ˆ256, extracted from 39K
selected video clips. We randomly cropped these clips into
256 ˆ 256 patches and used them to train the system. We
used Adam [43] optimizer with batch size of 4. We employed
a training strategy commonly used in recent papers [44],
[10], [14], where the video codec is trained on a group of
consecutive frames. In general, utilizing a larger group of
frames in training can lead to better results. However, similar
to [10], [14] and motivated by memory constraints, in our
experiments the loss function for each layer is computed over
N “ 5 consecutive frames as follows:
L˚
base “ 1
N
N
ÿ
t“1
Lbaseptq,
L˚
enh “ 1
N
N
ÿ
t“1
Lenhptq,
(23)
where Lbaseptq and Lenhptq are defined as in (17) and (21),
respectively. Using this training strategy, the gradients of each
frame are back-propagated towards other frames in the group,
which allows the system to capture temporal relationships
among a group of consecutive frames.
For the base layer, we used λbase P t2, 4, 8, 16u. All
networks in the base layer were first initialized with their pre-
trained weights from [10]. For YOLOv5, we used the PyTorch
implementation provided in [45], and used the checkpoint for
the “small” model for the initialization. The learning rate was
set to a small value 10´6, and the entire layer was trained end-
to-end for 10 epochs. We first trained the base layer, and then
kept it frozen during the training of the enhancement layer.
For
the
enhancement
layer,
we
used
λenh
P
t256, 512, 1024, 2048u. The learning rate was set to 10´4

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
for the first 5 epochs, and then reduced to 10´5 for the
next 10 epochs. We first trained the enhancement layer with
λenh “ 2048 (highest rate), then all lower-rate models were
initialized from this model.
B. Evaluation Methodology
1) Evaluation Datasets: To evaluate a video codec intended
for both object detection and input frame recovery, it is nec-
essary to test it on datasets consisting of raw (uncompressed)
video and associated object labels. To our knowledge, only
two such datasets are currently available – SFU-HW-Objects-
v1 [46] and TVD [47] – and both are being used in the MPEG-
VCM standardization effort [17]. The SFU-HW-Objects-v1
dataset is based on raw YUV420 video sequences that were
used in the development of video coding standards such as
HEVC [4] and VVC [5]. These sequences are usually referred
to as “HEVC test sequences” and come in several classes.
We used sequences from three classes: Class B (1920ˆ1080
resolution), Class C (832ˆ480), and Class D (416ˆ240). Each
sequence contains between 240–600 frames and their frame
rates range from 24–50 frames per second. A subset of these
sequences was labeled with COCO7-style object labels. The
TVD dataset includes 86 sequences, each consisting of 65
frames. However, object labels are only provided for 55 unique
video triplets (3-frame sequences).
2) Benchmark Methods:
We used the following video
codecs as benchmarks: HEVC, VVC, DCVC-TCM [14],
CANF-VC [10], and DCVC [9]. For HEVC, we used HM
18.0 [48] with LDP profile (encoder lowdelay P main.cfg),
and for VVC, we employed VTM 23.4 [49] with LDP profile
(encoder lowdelay P vtm.cfg). Among these, VTM was cho-
sen as the anchor against which all other codecs are compared.
For HM, which is the standard implementation of HEVC [4],
the quantization parameter (QP) values were t27, 29, 32, 38u.
For VTM, which is the standard implementation of VVC [5],
QP values were t22, 24, 27, 29u. The internal color space for
HM and VTM was YUV420 (8 bit). Also, four past reference
frames were used for motion estimation in these conventional
codecs. However, all the tested learned codecs (CANF-VC,
DCVC-TCM, LCCM-VC, DCVC, and the proposed method)
use only one reference frame in their optical flow estimators.
As reported in [14], if we use only one reference frame for the
conventional codecs instead of four, their performance will be
degraded considerably. In line with the common practice in
previous learned video codecs [10], [14], in the experiments,
we set the IntraPeriod (also known as Group Of Pictures, GOP)
to 32 for all codecs when testing them on SFU-HW-Objects-
v1 to be able to compare our results with other existing works.
For intra-frame coding of the first frame in each GOP, we used
the intra-frame coder from CANF-VC for the base layer and
the intra-frame coder from DCVC-TCM for the enhancement
layer. On the TVD dataset, the GOP size is set to 3 because
sequences are 3-frames long. For CANF-VC, DCVC-TCM,
LCCM-VC, and DCVC, which require RGB frames, we first
converted all YUV 420 videos to RGB format using ffmpeg
[50], following the ITU-R BT.709 recommendation [51]. The
resulting RGB frames were then used for both training and
inference.
3) Evaluation Metrics: Following the existing practice in
the learned video coding literature [10], [52], [9], [14], to
evaluate the performance of various codecs, the bitrates were
measured in bits per pixel (bpp) and the frame reconstruction
quality was measured by RGB Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(PSNR-RGB) and RGB Multi-Scale Structural Similarity In-
dex Metric (MS-SSIM-RGB) [53]. Object detection accuracy
was measured by Mean Average Precision (mAP) [33]. The
mAP is a popular metric used to evaluate the accuracy of
object detection models. It is computed by first calculating the
Average Precision (AP) for each class, which is the area under
the Precision-Recall curve. Precision is the ratio of correctly
predicted positive samples to all predicted positives, while
Recall is the ratio of correctly predicted positives to all actual
positives. The mAP is then obtained by averaging the APs
across all classes, giving an overall performance score for the
model’s ability to detect objects across different categories.
Following the methodology used in MPEG-VCM [17], these
quantities can be agglomerated into a single numerical score
called Bjøntegaard Delta Rate (BD-Rate) [54], which com-
putes the average bitrate difference between two codecs at the
equivalent quality level, where the quality may be measured
by PSNR-RGB, MS-SSIM-RGB, or mAP, as the case may be.
So, for example, if a certain codec achieves –10% BD-Rate-
mAP relative to a given anchor, it means that it achieves, on
average, 10% bitrate reduction relative to the anchor while
producing the same mAP.
C. Object Detection Performance
First, we evaluate the object detection performance. For
the proposed codec, we only need to decode the base-layer
bitstream and feed it to the pre-trained YOLOv5 back-end.
For other codecs, we decode each frame and then feed it
to the pre-trained YOLOv5. Fig. 13 shows the mAP (%)
vs. bitrate (bpp) on the three classes of sequences from the
SFU-HW-Objects-v1 dataset. The straight horizontal line in
each graph is the performance of YOLOv5 without input
frame compression. The legend in each graph shows BD-
Rate-mAP percentage in the brackets, relative to the VTM
anchor. Negative values indicate bit savings relative to the
anchor at the equivalent mAP. BD-Rate-mAP results are also
summarized in Table I, where the best result in each row is
highlighted in bold. The table also includes the results on
the TVD dataset. However, since the sequences in the TVD
datset are short (3 frames each), the performance of most
codecs is similar. The TVD sequences seem too short to allow
distinguishing the various codecs’ ability to capture long-range
relationships among features relevant to object detection. The
last two rows in Table I show the average BD-Rate-mAP
results, averaged according to the number of frames in each
dataset. We see that the overall performance (bottom row) is
dominated by the performance on SFU-HW-Objects-v1, since
this dataset has many more frames than TVD. Overall, the
results indicate that the proposed codec in the base layer
outperforms all other codecs. HM comes as the second best,
followed by LCCM-VC and DCVC-TCM.
Fig. 14 provides a visual example of object detection on
a sample frame from the PartyScene sequence (HEVC Class

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 13. Comparing the performance of various methods in terms of object detection mAP (%) on three datasets. The straight horizontal line in each graph
is the performance of YOLOv5 without input compression. In the legend of each graph, the BD-Rate(%) of the corresponding method is also shown with
respect to VTM (anchor).
Fig. 14. Visualizing object detection performance of various methods on a sample frame from PartyScene (HEVC Class C). The ground-truth object labels
come from the SFU-HW-Objects-v1 dataset.
C). In this figure, we show the bounding box of the detected
objects overlaid on the reconstructed frame. For the proposed
method, we show the base frame because only base-layer
information is used. As seen in this example, the proposed
method is capable of achieving better detection accuracy at a
lower rate compared to other methods. Specifically, we note
that in the frames produced by other codecs, the gift box is
often mis-detected as a suitcase, and the gift bag is confused
with a handbag. While these objects might be similar to some
extent, the compression artifacts introduced by other codecs
cause the detector to produce incorrect detections, whereas
our method preserves the relevant features well, avoiding mis-
detection even at lower rates than other methods.
D. Frame Reconstruction Performance
When it comes to the performance of reconstructing com-
pressed frames for human viewing, the situation is straightfor-
ward for conventional video codecs, whether learned or hand-
crafted: we simply decode the compressed bitstream, generate
the decoded frames, and measure their quality using a metric
(PSNR-RGB or MS-SSIM-RGB in this work). However, for
the proposed codec, the following options can be considered:
‚ Option 1: First, note that the base layer of the proposed
system generates video frames and stores them in the
base frame buffer, as shown in Fig. 3. Such frames are
intended for object detection rather than human viewing;
they preserve enough information to detect objects at low
rates, but lack some of the information that is irrelevant
for object detection. Nevertheless, we could ask what
their quality is in terms of frame reconstruction metrics.
In Figs. 15-16 and Tables II-III, we refer to this approach
as “Base”. In this case, only the base-layer bitrate is
counted, since base frames are generated from the base-
layer bitstream only.
‚ Option 2: The intended use of the proposed codec is in
a closed-loop automated analytics system, where analysis
is performed using object detection (base layer) informa-
tion, and frame reconstruction is initiated depending on
the results of the base-layer analysis. For example, in a
traffic monitoring system, object detection runs continu-
ously. When the arrangement of detected objects suggests
a traffic violation, the enhancement layer is turned on to
provide additional information for frame reconstruction
and human viewing. Hence, given that base-layer infor-
mation is already available at the analysis server, only the
enhancement layer bitstream needs to be communicated
to provide high-quality frame reconstruction. The bitrate
in this case is the enhancement-layer bitrate, and the

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
TABLE I
OBJECT DETECTION PERFORMANCE IN TERMS OF BD-RATE-MAP (%) ON DIFFERENT DATASETS. THE ANCHOR IS VTM. “BASE” REPRESENTS THE PROPOSED METHOD IN THE BASE LAYER.
Dataset
CANF-VC [10]
DCVC-TCM [14]
LCCM-VC [23]
DCVC [9]
Base
HM
SFU-HW-Objects-v1 (HEVC Class B)
241.5
86.5
10.6
325
–34.2
9.5
SFU-HW-Objects-v1 (HEVC Class C)
54.8
8.3
37.1
84.9
–19.8
38.7
SFU-HW-Objects-v1 (HEVC Class D)
102.3
48.3
76.7
175
4.4
78.1
TVD
0.1
0.2
0.1
33.1
-0.5
0.2
Average (SFU-HW-Objects-v1)
136.2
48.8
40.5
198.9
-17.1
41.1
Average
134.2
48.18
39.9
196.5
-16.8
43.5
TABLE II
FRAME RECONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE IN TERMS OF BD-RATE-PSNR (%) ON DIFFERENT DATASETS. THE ANCHOR IS VTM. THE LAST THREE COLUMNS FROM THE RIGHT SHOW THE RESULTS OF THE
THREE CASES OF THE PROPOSED METHOD.
Dataset
CANF-VC [10]
DCVC-TCM [14]
LCCM-VC [23]
DCVC [9]
Base
Enh
Base+Enh
HM
HEVC Class B
59.8
24.1
55.5
101.7
162.4
29.1
65.3
23.4
HEVC Class C
56.1
36.9
52.0
99.4
136.5
32.5
68.5
11.6
HEVC Class D
58.1
30.4
53.6
30.4
133.7
26.7
62.4
17.4
TVD
27.5
31.4
25.6
67.1
83.4
19.6
44.5
9.6
Average (HEVC)
58.0
30.3
53.7
77.9
144.7
29.4
65.4
17.6
Average
57.6
30.3
53.3
77.7
143.9
29.3
65.1
17.5
TABLE III
FRAME RECONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE IN TERMS OF BD-RATE-MS-SSIM (%) ON DIFFERENT DATASETS. THE ANCHOR IS VTM. THE LAST THREE COLUMNS FROM THE RIGHT SHOW THE RESULTS OF
THE THREE CASES OF THE PROPOSED METHOD.
Dataset
CANF-VC [10]
DCVC-TCM [14]
LCCM-VC [23]
DCVC [9]
Base
Enh
Base+Enh
HM
HEVC Class B
56.7
1.2
39.1
72.3
60.8
3.6
34.4
9.2
HEVC Class C
51.8
6.7
44.1
59.5
51.1
4.6
35.5
37.9
HEVC Class D
70.1
11.2
61.7
56.3
53.4
0.3
33.5
41.0
TVD
15.1
8.2
13.3
9.6
39.3
0.7
16.2
14.6
Average (HEVC)
59.4
6.2
48.0
63.0
55.3
2.8
34.4
28.7
Average
58.8
6.2
47.5
62.2
55.0
2.8
34.1
28.5

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 15. Comparing the input reconstruction performance of various methods in terms of PSNR-RGB (dB) on three datasets. In the legend of each graph,
the BD-Rate(%) of the corresponding method is also shown with respect to VTM (anchor). “Base,” “Enh,” and “Base+Enh” represent different cases of the
proposed system.
Fig. 16.
Comparing the input reconstruction performance of various methods in terms of MS-SSIM-RGB on three datasets. In the legend of each graph,
the BD-Rate(%) of the corresponding method is also shown with respect to VTM (anchor). “Base,” “Enh,” and “Base+Enh” represent different cases of the
proposed system.
frame quality is measured on the enhancement-layer
frames. This approach is termed “Enh” in Figs. 15-16
and Tables II-III. It is worth noting that the MPEG-
VCM evaluation framework [55] suggests comparing this
approach against conventional coding approaches. The
goal of MPEG-VCM is stated as [55]: “The bitrate of
the additional compressed bitstream shall be less than the
bitrate of the bitstream at similar quality as measured by
PSNR, which is the output of the VVC encoding of the
unprocessed video.”
‚ Option 3: Finally, we can also count the total bitrate
(base + enhancement layer) for the proposed codec, along
with enhancement-layer frame quality. This is referred
to as “Base+Enh” in Figs. 15-16 and Tables II-III. It is
debatable whether the comparison of conventional coding
against this case is realistic. Such a comparison may make
sense if we knew in advance that a situation of interest
(e.g., traffic violation in our earlier example) would occur
at some point in time, without performing any visual
analysis. In such a case, our codec would still have to
encode both base and enhancement layer bitstreams, even
though the result of the analysis is apparently known
ahead of time. Nevertheless, we included these “oracle-
style” results for completeness, even though they show
less favorable performance of our codec.
We now evaluate the proposed method using these three
options and compare its performance with other benchmark
methods through both quantitative and qualitative analyses.
1) Quantitative Results using PSNR-RGB: Fig. 15 shows
the PSNR-RGB (in dB) versus bitrate for various cases on the
three classes of HEVC video sequences. The legend shows
BD-Rate-PSNR (%) relative to VTM in the brackets. These
results are also tabulated in Table II, along with BD-Rate-
PSNR on the TVD dataset. As seen from these results, for the
input frame reconstruction task, the best-performing method
is VTM (as all values in this table are positive, meaning that
all methods performs worse than VTM) followed by HM and
then our proposed Enh. The gap between VTM and our Enh
is about 29%. This is not surprising, given that conventional
video codecs are known to perform very well on the PSNR
metric. It is interesting to note that even though our Base
method uses the base layer bitstream only (seemingly a low
bitrate), it performs the worst among all the methods tested
in Table II. This is because BD-Rate-PSNR between a given
codec and the anchor is measured at the equivalent PSNR, and
our Base method needs a lot of bits to reach the equivalent
PSNR to VTM. Our base layer was designed to support object
detection, so it lacks the details needed to achieve high PSNR,
and therefore needs to use a lot of bits to bring those details
back in.
2) Quantitative Results using MS-SSIM-RGB: Fig. 16 and
Table III show analogous results but with MS-SSIM-RGB as
the frame quality metric. Learned codecs are known to perform
better on MS-SSIM-RGB than on PSNR-RGB, even when
MSE is used in their loss function (21). Indeed, this is seen in
Fig. 16 and Table III. Specifically, although VTM still comes

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 17. Comparing the input reconstruction performance of various methods on a patch from a sample frame of RaceHorses (HEVC Class C). The (bpp,
PSNR-RGB, MS-SSIM-RGB) for HM, VTM, DCVC, CANF-VC, DCVC-TCM, LCCM-VC, the proposed method (Base+Enh), and the proposed method
(Enh) is (0.43,33.64,0.9759), (0.43,33.96,0.9807), (0.44,32.65,0.9678), (0.42,33.50,0.9750), (0.43,33.61,0.9760), (0.44,33.78,0.9771), (0.42,33.60,0.9758), and
(0.37,33.60,0.9758), respectively. Note that the proposed Enh and the proposed Base+Enh produce the same frame – indicated by “Proposed” in the figure –
only the bits are counted differently.
out as the best codec on BD-Rate-SSIM, the gap between it
and our Enh (the second-best method) is now about 2.8%.
DCVC-TCM (the third-best method) also comes to within
a few percentage points of VTM. Almost all other codecs
perform comparatively better in Table III than in Table II. It
is interesting to note that our Base method records the highest
jump in performance between Table II and Table III. This
suggests that object-relevant information, which is preserved
in our base layer, is also favorable to quality metrics such as
MS-SSIM-RGB.
3) Qualitative Results: Fig. 17 shows a patch from a sample
frame from RaceHorses (HEVC Class C) reconstructed by var-
ious codecs at a similar bitrate: 0.42–0.44 bpp for all codecs,
except our Enh at 0.37 bpp. As seen from these examples,
learned codecs tend to suppress some details, especially in the
grass in the background; among the learned codecs, LCCM-
VC and the proposed one seem to have recovered most of
these details. Fig. 18 shows visual comparisons of base and
enhancement-layer (reconstructed) frames produced by our
codec. It is evident that base frames lack detail, but they
preserve enough detail needed to identify objects, which is
what the base layer is designed for.
E. Break-Even Analysis
In the preceding sections, we provided experimental results
for the machine task (object detection) and human viewing
separately. We saw that the proposed scalable codec performs
better than the alternatives on the machine task (Table I) while
VTM is the best-performing codec on frame reconstruction for
human viewing (Tables II and III).
So, which codec is better – VTM or the proposed one? That
depends on how frequently one expects human viewing will be
required in a particular application: whenever human viewing
is needed, VTM is better, but when the system performs the
machine task only, the proposed codec is better. To enable
numerical comparison of codecs in such a scenario, we adopt
break-even analysis from [28]. The gist of break-even analysis
is as follows. From Table I, the proposed codec is, on average,
16.8% more efficient than VTM when the machine task is
used. In other words, it uses 0.832 (or 83.2%) of the bits
used by VTM in this case. Meanwhile, from Table II, the
proposed codec in the Enh regime is, on average, 29.3%
less efficient than VTM (it uses 1.293 of the VTM bits) on
frame reconstruction for human viewing, when frame quality
is measured by PSNR-RGB. Let ϕ P r0, 1s be the fraction
of time that input frame reconstruction is needed for human
viewing. The amount of bits used by our system will be less
than or equal to that used by VTM if
p1 ´ ϕq ¨ 0.832 ` ϕ ¨ 1.293 ď 1.
(24)
Solving for ϕ that achieves equality in (24), we obtain the
break-even point of ϕ “ 0.37. That is to say, if input
reconstruction for human viewing is needed less than 37%
of the time, our system will provide overall bit savings over
VTM. However, if MS-SSIM-RGB is used as the frame quality
metric, we obtain ϕ “ 0.86. Using this analysis, the proposed
method in the Enh regime always outperforms (ϕ “ 1) the
other codecs in this study, meaning that it provides bit savings
regardless of the fraction of time used for human viewing. For
completeness, Table IV also shows the break-even points of
Base+Enh against VTM. Although Base+Enh results are less
favorable to our method and less realistic in a practical setting,
as discussed earlier, even in this case our method provides
gains over VTM when human viewing is needed less than
21% of the time.

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
Fig. 18.
Three examples of the visual quality of the base frame and the corresponding enhancement-layer reconstructed frame. Top row: a frame from
RaceHorses (HEVC Class D, Base Rate=0.13, Enhancement Rate=0.05); Middle row: a frame from BasketballPass (HEVC Class D, Base Rate=0.07,
Enhancement Rate=0.06); Bottom row: a frame from the TVD dataset (Base Rate=0.16, Enhancement Rate=0.08).
TABLE IV
THE BREAK-EVEN POINT ϕ AGAINST VTM.
Frame quality metric
Enh
Base+Enh
PSNR-RGB
0.37
0.21
MS-SSIM-RGB
0.86
0.33
But how often is human viewing needed in these kinds of
applications - traffic monitoring, surveillance, etc.? We do not
have a precise answer to this question. One reference point
could be a report published in 2015 [56], suggesting that
less than 1% of all surveillance video is watched live. Given
the proliferation of surveillance technology and likely much
slower increase (if any) of human viewers of surveillance
video, the percentage is almost certainly lower now. Although
“human viewing” in our system is not the same as “live
viewing,” the figure of 1% (ϕ “ 0.01) can serve as a ballpark
estimate, and we see in Table IV that the break-even points
of our system are many-fold higher than that. In other words,
our system could comfortably provide gains over VTM in a
practical surveillance scenario.
F. Ablation Study
In this section, we provide the results of an ablation study
to demonstrate the efficiency of our proposed system. In our
ablation study, we considered the following cases:
‚ Case 1: Reusing the motion flow map of the base layer for
the enhancement layer: In our proposed system, motion
estimation is performed independently for both the base
and enhancement layers, with the resulting motion flow
maps encoded and transmitted separately to the decoder.
One potential optimization is to share the base layer’s mo-
tion flow map with the enhancement layer, eliminating the
need for a separate motion bitstream in the enhancement
layer. We tested this approach on HEVC Class B. How-
ever, the results showed that using the base layer’s flow
map for the enhancement layer degraded the BD-Rate-
PSNR performance by approximately 1%. Therefore, we
opted to maintain separate motion estimation and coding
networks for each layer.
‚ Case 2: Freezing the cloned front-end network in the
base layer: As discussed in Section IV-B4, during the
training of the base layer, the cloned front-end network,
F front-end
trainable p.q, is allowed to be trained. A possible con-
sideration is whether freezing this network might yield
better results. We tested this approach on HEVC Class
B, and the results showed that training this network led
to approximately 2% better rate savings. Therefore, in our
proposed system, we did not freeze the weights of this
network during training.
‚ Case 3: The role of the proposed entropy model: As dis-
cussed in Section IV-C7, our proposed entropy estimation

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
module enhances the performance of the entropy model
proposed in [14] by fusing the hyper priors of the current
frame, ˆhe
t, with the temporal prior ˆce
t, the decoded latents
from the previous enhancement frame ˆye
t´1, and the base
features of the current frame ˆyb
t through an entropy
parameter estimation network. In contrast, the approach
in [14] feeds only the hyper-prior ˆhe
t and the temporal
prior ˆce
t to the entropy model. Our design, however,
enriches the input information by including ˆyb
t and ˆye
t´1
in the entropy model. Additionally, we incorporate an
attention layer to enable the system to learn where to
focus for effective entropy modeling. To evaluate the
effectiveness of our proposed entropy estimation model,
we replaced it with the original entropy model proposed
in [14] and tested the performance of the enhancement
layer on HEVC Class B. The results showed that our
proposed entropy model yields approximately 1.5% better
rate savings in the enhancement layer.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this manuscript, we provided a theoretical justification
for conditional lossy coding, a technique whose rate-distortion
bounds are better than those of the commonly-used residual
coding. We then presented the first end-to-end learned scalable
video codec that employs conditional coding and is capable
of efficiently supporting both human and machine vision.
Specifically, object detection is supported by the codec’s
base layer, while input reconstruction for human viewing is
supported by both the base and enhancement layer. We tested
the proposed codec on the video object detection datasets used
in MPEG-VCM, and compared it against recent learned and
conventional video codecs. The results show that the proposed
codec outperforms existing video codecs on the base task (ob-
ject detection) while providing comparable performance to the
best codecs on input frame reconstruction. We also performed
break-even analysis against VTM, the best-performing codec
on input frame reconstruction, which showed that in a practical
scenario, our codec is able to provide bit savings against VTM
if human viewing is needed less than 21% of the time.
ABBREVIATIONS
‚ DNN: Deep Neural Network
‚ HEVC: High Efficiency Video Coding
‚ VVC: Versatile Video Coding
‚ VCM: Video Coding for Machines
‚ CV: Computer Vision
‚ CANF-VC: Conditional Augmented Normalizing Flows
for Video Coding
‚ LCCM-VC: Learned Conditional Coding Modes for
Video Coding
‚ TCM: Temporal Context Mining
REFERENCES
[1] L. Duan, J. Liu, W. Yang, T. Huang, and W. Gao, “Video coding
for machines: A paradigm of collaborative compression and intelligent
analytics,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 29, p. 8680–8695, 2020.
[2] MPEG-CDVS, “Compact descriptors for visual search.”
ISO/IEC JTC
1 15938-13, 2015.
[3] MPEG-CDVA, “Compact descriptors for video analysis.” ISO/IEC JTC
1 15938-15, 2019.
[4] G. J. Sullivan, J. R. Ohm, W. J. Han, and T. Wiegand, “Overview of the
high efficiency video coding (HEVC) standard,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 22, no. 12, 2012.
[5] B. Bross, Y. K. Wang, Y. Ye, S. Liu, J. Chen, G. J. Sullivan, and J. R.
Ohm, “Overview of the versatile video coding (VVC) standard and its
applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
vol. 31, no. 10, 2021.
[6] J. Ball´e, D. Minnen, S. Singh, S. J. Hwang, and N. Johnston, “Variational
image compression with a scale hyperprior,” in Intl. Conf. on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2018, pp. 1–23.
[7] D. Minnen, J. Ball´e, and G. D. Toderici, “Joint autoregressive and
hierarchical priors for learned image compression,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 31, 2018.
[8] Z. Cheng, H. Sun, M. Takeuchi, and J. Katto, “Learned image com-
pression with discretized gaussian mixture likelihoods and attention
modules,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF CVPR, 2020.
[9] J. Li, B. Li, and Y. Lu, “Deep contextual video compression,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
[10] Y. H. Ho, C. P. Chang, P. Y. Chen, A. Gnutti, and W. H. Peng, “CANF-
VC: Conditional augmented normalizing flows for video compression,”
in Proc. ECCV, 2022.
[11] Y. H. Ho, C. C. Chan, W. H. Peng, H. M. Hang, and M. Domanski,
“ANFIC: Image compression using augmented normalizing flows,” IEEE
Open Journal of Circuits and Systems, vol. 2, pp. 613–626, 2021.
[12] T. Ladune, P. Philippe, W. Hamidouche, L. Zhang, and O. Deforges,
“Conditional coding for flexible learned video compression,” in Neural
Compression From Information Theory to Applications–Workshop@
ICLR 2021, 2021.
[13] E. Agustsson, D. Minnen, N. Johnston, B. J., H. S. J., and G. Toderici,
“Scale-space flow for end-to-end optimized video compression,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF CVPR, 2020, pp. 8503–8512.
[14] X. Sheng, J. Li, B. Li, L. Li, D. Liu, and Y. Lu, “Temporal context min-
ing for learned video compression,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25,
pp. 7311–7322, 2023.
[15] W. Zhang, T. Yao, S. Zhu, and A. E. Saddik, “Deep learning–based
multimedia analytics: a review,” ACM TOMCCAP, vol. 15, 2019.
[16] J. Ascenso, E. Alshina, and T. Ebrahimi, “The JPEG AI standard:
Providing efficient human and machine visual data consumption,” IEEE
MultiMedia, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 100–111, 2023.
[17] M. Rafie, L. Yu, Y. Zhang, and S. Liu, “[VCM] call for evidence for
video coding for machines.”
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 2, m55605,
Oct. 2020.
[18] Y. Hu, S. Yang, W. Yang, L.-Y. Duan, and J. Liu, “Towards coding for
human and machine vision: A scalable image coding approach,” in Proc.
IEEE ICME, 2020.
[19] K. Liu, D. Liu, L. Li, N. Yan, and H. Li, “Semantics-to-signal scal-
able image compression with learned revertible representations,” Int. J.
Comput. Vis., p. 1–17, Jun. 2021.
[20] H. Choi and I. V. Baji´c, “Scalable image coding for humans and
machines,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, p. 2739–2754, 2022.
[21] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, 2nd ed.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
[22] G. Wang, C. Wu, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, and C. Shen, “YOLOv5: An effective
single-stage object detector,” in IEEE/CVF CVPR, 2021, pp. 14 138–
14 147.
[23] H. Hadizadeh and I. V. Baji´c, “LCCM-VC: Learned conditional coding
modes for video coding,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP Workshops, 2023.
[24] G. Lu, W. Ouyang, D. Xu, X. Zhang, C. Cai, and Z. Gao, “DVC: An
end-to-end deep video compression framework,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
CVPR, 2019, p. 11006–11015.
[25] H. Liu, M. Lu, Z. Ma, F. Wang, Z. Xie, X. Cao, and Y. Wang, “Neural
video coding using multiscale motion compensation and spatiotemporal
context model,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
2020.
[26] Z. Hu, G. Lu, and D. Xu, “FVC: A new framework towards deep
video compression in feature space,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF CVPR, 2021,
p. 1502–1511.
[27] T. Ladune, P. Philippe, W. Hamidouche, L. Zhang, and O. D´eforges,
“Optical flow and mode selection for learning-based video coding,” in
IEEE 22nd International Workshop on Multimedia Signal Processing,,
2020.
[28] H. Choi and I. V. Baji´c, “Scalable video coding for humans and ma-
chines,” in IEEE Int. Workshop on Multimedia Signal Process. (MMSP),
Sep. 2022.

---PAGE BREAK---
EURASIP J. IMAGE AND VIDEO PROCESSING 2024:41
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1186/S13640-024-00657-W
[29] ——, “Latent-space scalability for multi-task collaborative intelligence,”
in Proc. IEEE ICIP’21, Sep. 2021, p. 3562–3566.
[30] W. Jiang, H. Choi, and F. Racap´e, “Adaptive human-centric video
compression for humans and machines,” in 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW),
2023.
[31] Z. Huang, C. Jia, S. Wang, and S. Ma, “HMFVC: A human-machine
friendly video compression scheme,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., 2022.
[32] H. Lin, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Lin, X. Wang, and T. Zhao, “DeepSVC:
Deep scalable video coding for both machine and human vision,” in MM
’23: Proc. of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
2023, p. 9205–9214.
[33] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “YOLOv3: An incremental improvement,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02767, Apr. 2018.
[34] T. Gong, K. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Chu, F. Zhu, D. Lin, N. Yu, and H. Feng,
“Temporal ROI align for video object recognition,” in Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), vol. 35, 2021, p.
1442–1450.
[35] R. M. Gray, “A new class of lower bounds to information rates of
stationary sources via conditional rate-distortion functions,” IEEE Trans.
Information Theory, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 480–489, 1973.
[36] W. Liu, A. G. B. Tsang, M. Yang, H. Wu, and Y. Gong, “SSD: Single
shot multibox detector,” in European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV).
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Springer, 2016, pp. 21–37.
[37] Y. Foroutan, A. Harell, A. de Andrade, and I. V. Baji´c, “Base layer
efficiency in scalable human-machine coding,” in Proc. IEEE ICIP,
2023, pp. 3299–3303.
[38] D. Sun, X. Yang, M. Liu, and J. Kautz, “PWC-Net: CNNs for optical
flow using pyramid, warping, and cost volume,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
CVPR, 2018, p. 8934–8943.
[39] A. Harell, A. De Andrade, and I. V. Baji´c, “Rate-distortion in image
coding for machines,” in Proc. Picture Coding Symposium (PCS), 2022,
pp. 199–203.
[40] A. Harell, Y. Foroutan, N. Ahuja, P. Datta, B. Kanzariya, V. S. So-
mayaulu, O. Tickoo, A. de Andrade, and I. V. Baji´c, “Rate-distortion
theory in coding for machines and its application,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.17295, 2023.
[41] J. Ball´e, V. Laparra, and E. P. Simoncelli, “End-to-end optimized image
compression,” in ICLR 2017, 2017.
[42] T. Xue, B. Chen, J. Wu, D. Wei, and W. Freeman, “Video enhancement
with task-oriented flow,” Int. J. Computer Vision, vol. 127, no. 8, pp.
1106–1125, 2019.
[43] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in International Conference for Learning Representations, 2015.
[44] G. Lu, C. Cai, X. Zhang, L. Chen, W. Ouyang, D. Xu, and Z. Gao,
“Content adaptive and error propagation aware deep video compression,”
in Proc. ECCV, 2020, pp. 456–472.
[45] Ultralytics, “The PyTorch implementation of YOLOv5,” https://pytorch.
org/hub/ultralytics yolov5/, 2022-12-01.
[46] H. Choi, E. Hosseini, S. R. Alvar, R. A. Cohen, and I. V. Baji´c, “A
dataset of labelled objects on raw video sequences,” Data in Brief, vol.
34., p. 106701, 2021.
[47] X. Xu, S. Liu, and Z. Li, “Tencent video dataset (TVD): A video dataset
for learning-based visual data compression and analysis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2105.05961, 2021.
[48] HM, “Reference software for HEVC,” https://vcgit.hhi.fraunhofer.de/
Zhu/HM/blob/HM-16.22/cfg/encoder lowdelay P main.cfg,
2022-03-
10.
[49] VTM, “Reference software for VVC,” https://vcgit.hhi.fraunhofer.de/
jvet/VVCSoftware VTM, 2022-03-10.
[50] “Ffmpeg,” https://ffmpeg.org/, 2023, version 6.0, accessed September
14, 2024.
[51] ITU, “Recommendation ITU-R BT.709: Parameter values for the HDTV
standards for production and international programme exchange,”
International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Tech. Rep. BT.709-6,
2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/R-REC-BT.709
[52] J. Lin, D. Liu, H. Li, and F. Wu, “M-LVC: multiple frames prediction
for learned video compression,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF CVPR, 2020, p.
3546–3554.
[53] Z. Wang, E. Simoncelli, and A. Bovik, “Multiscale structural similarity
for image quality assessment,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems,
and Computers, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 1398–1402.
[54] G. Bjøntegaard, “Calculation of average PSNR differences between RD-
curves,” Apr. 2001, vCEG-M33.
[55] M. Rafie, Y. Zhang, and S. Liu, “Evaluation framework for video coding
for machines.”
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 2, N41, Jan. 2021.
[56] J.
Honovich,
“Live
video
monitoring
usage
statistics,”
IPVM
Report, https://ipvm.com/reports/live-video-monitoring-usage-statistics,
2015-08-18.

---PAGE BREAK---
